Enhances Jakarta EE Data documentation (#191)
jakartaee/data: spec/src/main/asciidoc/jakarta-ee.adoc

== Interoperability with other Jakarta EE Specifications

> In this session, we will delve into the robust capabilities of Jakarta EE Data and its seamless integration with various specifications. This integration offers a comprehensive data persistence and management solution in Java applications. When operating within a Jakarta EE product, the availability of other Jakarta EE Technologies depends on the profile. This section outlines how related technologies from other Jakarta EE Specifications work together with Jakarta Data to achieve interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will delve into the robust capabilities of Jakarta EE Data and its seamless integration with other Jakarta EE specifications. This integration offers a comprehensive data persistence and management solution in Java applications. When operating within a Jakarta EE product, the availability of other Jakarta EE Technologies depends on the profile. This section outlines how related technologies from other Jakarta EE Specifications work together with Jakarta Data to achieve interoperability.
```

By leveraging CDI extensions and the provided strategies, you can effectively integrate Jakarta EE Data with CDI and take advantage of its powerful dependency injection capabilities, promoting modular and reusable code in y

=== Mapping an Entity

A Jakarta Data provider is an implementation of Jakarta Data that can utilize existing or new annotations for mapping entities. An entity refers to a class that is annotated to indicate its ability to represent objects in a storage engine, such as SQL or NoSQL databases.

For instance, a Jakarta Data provider with Jakarta Persistence support will scan Java classes that are annotated with `jakarta.persistence.Entity`. On the other hand, a provider with Jakarta NoSQL integration will scan classes that are annotated with `jakarta.nosql.Entity`.

It is important to note that a provider should ignore any annotations it does not support. For example, Jakarta Data NoSQL will ignore the Jakarta Persistence annotations and vice versa. By disregarding these `Repository` annotations, other Jakarta Data providers can handle them accordingly.

==== Jakarta Data Provider Name

> The `entity` annotation class is the primary strategy to avoid conflicts between Jakarta Data providers. In most cases, it is sufficient to differentiate between providers. However, there may be situations where more than the entity annotation class is needed. In such cases, the application can specify the name of the desired Jakarta Data provider using the optional `provider` attribute of the `Repository` annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The entity annotation class is the primary strategy to avoid conflicts between Jakarta Data providers. In most cases, it is sufficient to differentiate between providers. However, there may be situations where more than the entity annotation class is needed. In such cases, the application can specify the name of the desired Jakarta Data provider using the optional `provider` attribute of the `Repository` annotation.
```

When a repository method is annotated with an interceptor binding annotation, the interceptor is bound to the repository bean according to the interceptor binding annotation of the repository interface method, causing the bound interceptor to be invoked around the repository method when it runs. This enables the use of interceptors such as `jakarta.transaction.Transactional` on repository methods when running in an environment where the Jakarta EE technology that provides the interceptor is available.

=== Mapping an Entity

An entity class in Jakarta Data is a regular Java class that is annotated to indicate its ability to represent objects in a database. Jakarta Data itself does not provide specific annotations for mapping entities. Instead, each Jakarta Data provider can create annotations or support existing ones, such as those used in Jakarta Persistence or Jakarta NoSQL.

==== Jakarta Persistence

> Jakarta Persistence is a Jakarta EE specification that provides an object-relational mapping (ORM) framework for Java applications. It aims to simplify the development of Java applications that interact with relational databases.

Reviewer: I think we should remove these spec descriptions at the start of each section. They're nice descriptions, but I'd prefer to keep the spec concise, and I would expect spec users to either already be familiar with the other specifications, or look at the other specs for a description.

I looked at how the Bean Validation and Persistence specs talk about integrations, and they jump right into the integration without a description.

=== Jakarta NoSQL

Jakarta NoSQL is a Jakarta EE specification that provides a standardized API and annotations for Java applications to interact with NoSQL databases. It aims to offer a consistent and portable approach for working with various NoSQL databases.

When integrating Jakarta Data with Jakarta NoSQL, developers can use the NoSQL annotations to define the mapping of entities in repositories. Entities in Jakarta NoSQL are typically annotated with `jakarta.nosql.Entity` to indicate their suitability for persistence in NoSQL databases.

A Jakarta Data provider that supports Jakarta NoSQL will scan classes marked with the `jakarta.nosql.Entity` annotation. This scanning process can be facilitated using a CDI extension that interacts with Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data to establish the mappings between entities and repositories.

By supporting Jakarta NoSQL annotations, Jakarta Data providers enable Java developers to utilize familiar and standardized mapping techniques when defining entities in repositories, ensuring compatibility and interoperability with the respective technologies.

> === Jakarta Validation

Author: Thank you.

When a repository method is annotated with an interceptor binding annotation, the interceptor is bound to the repository bean according to the interceptor binding annotation of the repository interface method, causing the bound interceptor to be invoked around the repository method when it runs. This enables the use of interceptors such as `jakarta.transaction.Transactional` on repository methods when running in an environment where the Jakarta EE technology that provides the interceptor is available.

> === Mapping an Entity
> 
> An entity class in Jakarta Data is a regular Java class that is annotated to indicate its ability to represent objects in a database. Jakarta Data itself does not provide specific annotations for mapping entities. Instead, each Jakarta Data provider can create annotations or support existing ones, such as those used in Jakarta Persistence or Jakarta NoSQL.

Reviewer 2: Let's delete this section. It duplicates/summarizes another "Mapping an Entity" section that we have above which is more detailed.  It would be confusing to have 2 separate sections both titled "Mapping an Entity".

```suggestion
```

> ==== Jakarta Persistence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Jakarta Persistence
```

Jakarta Persistence is a Jakarta EE specification that provides an object-relational mapping (ORM) framework for Java applications. It aims to simplify the development of Java applications that interact with relational databases.

When integrating Jakarta Data with Jakarta Persistence, developers can leverage the JPA annotations to define the mapping of entities in repositories. Entities in Jakarta Persistence are typically annotated with `jakarta.persistence.Entity` to indicate their persistence capability.

> A Jakarta Data provider that supports Jakarta Persistence will scan classes marked with the `jakarta.persistence.Entity` annotation. This scanning process can be facilitated using a CDI extension that interacts with Jakarta Persistence and Jakarta Data to create the necessary mappings between entities and repositories.

Reviewer 2: The CDI extension piece belongs elsewhere (isolated to the CDI integration section) so that we don't burden standalone providers with their own dependency injection.
```suggestion
A Jakarta Data provider that supports Jakarta Persistence allows you to define repositories for classes marked with the `jakarta.persistence.Entity` annotation.
```

==== Jakarta NoSQL

Jakarta NoSQL is a Jakarta EE specification that provides a standardized API and annotations for Java applications to interact with NoSQL databases. It aims to offer a consistent and portable approach for working with various NoSQL databases.

When integrating Jakarta Data with Jakarta NoSQL, developers can use the NoSQL annotations to define the mapping of entities in repositories. Entities in Jakarta NoSQL are typically annotated with `jakarta.nosql.Entity` to indicate their suitability for persistence in NoSQL databases.

A Jakarta Data provider that supports Jakarta NoSQL will scan classes marked with the `jakarta.nosql.Entity` annotation. This scanning process can be facilitated using a CDI extension that interacts with Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data to establish the mappings between entities and repositories.

> By supporting Jakarta Persistence or Jakarta NoSQL annotations, Jakarta Data providers enable Java developers to utilize familiar and standardized mapping techniques when defining entities in repositories, ensuring compatibility and interoperability with the respective technologies.

Author: Thanks, I will remove it.

The following code snippet demonstrates the usage of Jakarta Validation annotations in the `Student` entity class:

[source,java]
----
@Schema(name = "Student")
@Entity
public class Student {

    @Id
    private String id;

    @Column
    @NotBlank
    private String name;

    @Positive
    @Min(18)
    @Column
    private int age;
}
----

In this example, the `name` field is annotated with `@NotBlank`, indicating that it must not be blank. The `age` field is annotated with both `@Positive` and `@Min(18)`, ensuring it is a positive integer greater than or equal to 18.

The `School` repository interface, shown below, utilizes the validation rules defined in the `Student` entity:

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface School extends PageableRepository<Student, String> {

}
----

> When performing operations such as saving or retrieving students through the `School` repository, the validation process is triggered, applying the defined constraints to ensure data consistency and adherence to the specified rules.

Reviewer 2: See prior comment regarding retrieval

The following code snippet demonstrates the usage of Jakarta Validation annotations in the `Student` entity class:

[source,java]
----
@Schema(name = "Student")
@Entity
public class Student {

    @Id
    private String id;

    @Column
    @NotBlank
    private String name;

    @Positive
    @Min(18)
    @Column
    private int age;
}
----

In this example, the `name` field is annotated with `@NotBlank`, indicating that it must not be blank. The `age` field is annotated with both `@Positive` and `@Min(18)`, ensuring it is a positive integer greater than or equal to 18.

The `School` repository interface, shown below, utilizes the validation rules defined in the `Student` entity:

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface School extends PageableRepository<Student, String> {

}

> ----

Author: Include the session explaining that the validation will happen on both insert, update, and make optional for delete and find.

=== Jakarta NoSQL

When integrating Jakarta Data with Jakarta NoSQL, developers can use the NoSQL annotations to define the mapping of entities in repositories. Entities in Jakarta NoSQL are typically annotated with `jakarta.nosql.Entity` to indicate their suitability for persistence in NoSQL databases.

A Jakarta Data provider that supports Jakarta NoSQL will scan classes marked with the `jakarta.nosql.Entity` annotation.

By supporting Jakarta NoSQL annotations, Jakarta Data providers enable Java developers to utilize familiar and standardized mapping techniques when defining entities in repositories, ensuring compatibility and interoperability with the respective technologies.

=== Jakarta Bean Validation

Integrating with Jakarta Validation ensures data consistency within the Java layer. By applying validation rules to the data, developers can enforce constraints and business rules, preventing invalid or inconsistent information from being processed or persisted.

> Incorporating Jakarta Validation into your Jakarta Data applications helps enforce data consistency at the Java layer. Whenever data is converted to or from Java objects, the validation rules defined in the entity are automatically executed. For instance, when persisting a `Student` object, the `name` field will be validated to ensure it is not blank.

Reviewer 2: We need to replace the text, "Whenever data is converted to or from Java objects" because it would require that validation be applied on find operations. Here is what we can change it to:
```suggestion
Incorporating Jakarta Validation into your Jakarta Data applications helps enforce data consistency at the Java layer. When you invoke the `save` or `saveAll` method on repositories, the Jakarta Data provider ensures that the validation rules defined in the entity are automatically executed prior to updating the database if a Jakarta Validation provider is present. For instance, when persisting a `Student` object, the `name` field will be validated to ensure it is not blank.
```

The following code snippet demonstrates the usage of Jakarta Validation annotations in the `Student` entity class:

[source,java]
----
@Schema(name = "Student")
@Entity
public class Student {

    @Id
    private String id;

    @Column
    @NotBlank
    private String name;

    @Positive
    @Min(18)
    @Column
    private int age;
}
----

In this example, the `name` field is annotated with `@NotBlank`, indicating that it must not be blank. The `age` field is annotated with both `@Positive` and `@Min(18)`, ensuring it is a positive integer greater than or equal to 18.

The `School` repository interface, shown below, utilizes the validation rules defined in the `Student` entity:

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface School extends PageableRepository<Student, String> {

}
----

> In the Jakarta Data specification, when integrating with Jakarta Bean Validation, the validation process should occur during the insert and update operations, specifically within the save methods of the Repositories interfaces. It means that when performing an insert or update operation on a database, Jakarta Bean Validation will execute the defined constraints to validate the data being inserted or updated.

Reviewer 2: A user could do an update operation via `@Query(jpql)` and there is no way that it could be validated because no entity objects are involved, so let's be more precise here and state that validation only applies to inserts/updates that are performed via save/saveAll,
```suggestion
In the Jakarta Data specification, when integrating with Jakarta Bean Validation, the validation process must occur for `save` and `saveAll` methods of Repository interfaces prior to making inserts or updates in the database. It means that when using the save methods to perform an insert or update operation on a database, Jakarta Bean Validation will execute the defined constraints to validate the data being inserted or updated.
```
